Readme update (#34)
OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dmxsun: README.md

> # rp2040-dmxsun: A USB-DMX-device based on RaspberryPi's RP2040 microcontroller with modular hardware

Reviewer: I think these hyphens would be more standard:
```suggestion
# rp2040-dmxsun: A USB-DMX device based on RaspberryPi's RP2040 micro-controller with modular hardware
```

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle/main/gfx/icon-dmxsun.svg" alt="drawing" width="128"/>
</p>

## What is it?

> The rp2040-dmxsun is a multi-purpose DMX-512-A toolbox to control stage lighting systems. It's most common use-case is to transmit the DMX data generated on a PC, RaspberryPi or similar in a format that the lighting fixtures on stage can understand. In the most simple case, it's an USB-DMX-Interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The rp2040-dmxsun is a multi-purpose DMX-512-A toolbox to control stage lighting systems. It's most common use-case is to transmit the DMX data generated on a PC, Raspberry Pi or similar in a format that the lighting fixtures on stage can understand. In the most simple case, it's an USB-DMX interface.
```

> DMX-512-A works in groups called universes and each universe can contain up to 512 channels. dmxsun can transmit up to 16 universes, meaning you can control 8192 channels of DMX data at the same time.

Reviewer: Pedant, I think the official naming is slots rather than channels, but the latter is probably better known by most people.

Author: Please be pedantic :) If we do have a standard that uses some specific wording, we should stick to that here as well. In the source code, I might have used "frame" (for a complete DMX packet) and that's not actually in the standard as well.

Dmxsun is usually connected to its host via a single USB connection that also powers the device.

> To the computer, the dmxsun device looks like a network card (it uses the CDC NCM interface) and the integrated DHCP-server assigns an IP-address to the host machine so they can talk to each other.

Reviewer: Is there actually a DHCP server? Isn't it just using zeroconf, which is more of a standard than a server?

Author: It indeed is a real DHCP server running on the device and proposing one IP address if asked for one (which is the standard behaviour of most OSes when they detect previously un-known network devices).
The [lwIP stack](https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/lwip/) that is used also supports "AutoIP" as a form of zeroconf. I had a quick look but found DHCP to be more "reliable". Some OSes might treat network connections as non-functional if their DHCP-requests stay unanswered.
However, I agree that some form of unsolicited service announcement (or mDNS) might help. And I should re-try the AutoIP to check if it works everywhere and makes things easier in the end.

Author: See #40

> To find out dmxsun's IP address, have a look at your kernel log on Linux (run `dmesg`) or hover over the `Disconnect USB device` icon in Window's task bar or check the network device properties on macOS.

Reviewer: You should add Avahi/Bonjour support to avoid needing to do this!

Author: True, mDNS seems to be the way of choice here.
However, the host name the device announces to the host should have some "random ID" in it so there is no problem when more than one device is connected.

Author: See #40

Reviewer: Perhaps part of the MAC?

Author: Well, the "MAC address" is also a pretty fake one: https://github.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle/blob/f5f1d511b9f2d2f3d519904ce44945ea090ec4ae/src/tusb_lwip_glue.c#L42
But here again, I'd stick to the same approach as we currently do: Use one byte of the "unique board ID"

Reviewer: Ah I didn't realise, yeah that should use part of the unique ID. I'd assumed something like that was already built into the library!

You can browse to this IP address in your web browser to access the integrated web server or you can send ArtNet or E1.31/sACN packets to the IP address to make dmxsun send this data as DMX data.

Furthermore, you can attach an nRF24 radio module to the base board to send or receive up to 4 universes wirelessly to or from another dmxsun device. That also means that the device can also work stand-alone, receiving DMX data from another dmxsun device and outputting it on local ports.

## Why is it called dmxsun?

The idea came when thinking about a suitable icon for the pages on the integrated web server. You can think about the dmxsun as being a central device and 16 rays of light coming out of it.

> Maybe it's also because outdoor light technicians absolutely love the sun since they can perfectly set up their light show while the sun is shining bright ;)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maybe it's also because outdoor lighting technicians absolutely love the sun since they can perfectly set up their light show while the sun is shining bright ;)
```

## How does it look like?

> The hardware consists of a base board into which the RaspberryPi Pico-board plugs in to. To get a quick overview of the board's status, 8 RGB status LEDs are attached to the base board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hardware consists of a base board into which the Raspberry Pi Pico-board plugs in to. To get a quick overview of the board's status, 8 RGB status LEDs are attached to the base board.
```

![3D rendering of the base board without the Pico board plugged in](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/823537/112216810-3885c680-8c22-11eb-8c1d-16773b1e30ae.png)

Attached to this base board can be 0 to 4 IO boards that carry the actual RS-485 drivers and XLR connectors:

![3D rendering of an IO board without the XLR connectors](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/823537/112217754-2eb09300-8c23-11eb-859d-61cfc67ca90c.png)

If all 4 IO boards are attached to the base board, you can have 16 output ports fitting into 1U of an 19" rack:

> ![3D rendering of base board + 4 IO boards](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/823537/112302789-c18d1400-8c9b-11eb-99d2-b17a0b3cfb81.png)

Reviewer: Do these renders not get pushed back to the repo, so you could use the raw versions?

Author: You mean via the KiCad-Exporter / KiBot-actions? Those currently create a zip-file that can be downloaded but they don't actively push anything to the repo. Even then, the camera angle and the specific combination of the base and the 4 IO boards is not done easily programmatically. I just used the GitHub-hosted images from the discussion pages.

## How is configuration data handled?

> The complete configuration of the device, including IP addresses, patchings, wireless configuration can be stored on each of the IO boards or on the base board.

Reviewer: Is there really more than one IP (does it actually store the PC side one)? Also patching singular. I'd say any unless it writes it to all of them.
```suggestion
The complete configuration of the device, including IP address, patching and wireless configuration can be stored on any of the IO boards or on the base board.
```

Author: True, the host's IP is not actually stored, it's just the device's IP minus 1.

When the device powers up, it scans the 4 IO board slots in order for connected boards and the configuration stored on them. As soon as a valid and non-disabled configuration is found, it is loaded and used. If no IO board has a valid configuration, it tries to load the config from the flash memory of the Pico board. If this also doesn't seem valid, a fallback configuration is applied.

> The status LEDs on the base board indicate which IO board has a valid configuration and which configuration is currently active.

Reviewer: If they may show multiple valid but inactive configs:
```suggestion
The status LEDs on the base board indicate which IO boards have a valid configuration and which configuration is currently active.
```

Author: It does :) Status LEDs for the IO boards display red if not IO board is connected to that slot, yellow if communication is successful but the config is invalid, green if the config is valid but hasn't been loaded and blue if the config is valid and is in use

> All configurations can be managed via the integrated web server.

Reviewer: This may be better if you mean which preset is used:
```suggestion
All the configurations can be managed via the integrated web server.
```

Or this if you mean all the settings can be set online:
```suggestion
All configuration can be managed via the integrated web server.
```

Longer answer: JLCPCB or a similar PCB factory. The schematics and PCB layout files are in the `hardware` folder (KiCad format) and you can send them to any PCB fab to have it produced for you. Then it's a bit of soldering on your side, plugging in a RaspberryPi Pico board and you're good to go.

If you just want to have a brief look at the schematics without cloning the repo and opening the files in KiCad, take a look at the kicad-export action: https://github.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle/actions/workflows/kicad-exports.yml. It will generate a zip-archive containing all sort of PDFs.

## How can I try it out without spending much?

Very good question! All you need is a RaspberryPi Pico board, a microUSB cable and a PC, Laptop or RaspberryPi. You won't be able to actually control lighting fixtures, but you can get an idea of how this project works.

* Download the latest `UF2`-file (for example from here: https://github.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle/actions/workflows/pico-build.yml) and flash it to your Pico board (see above)
* Wait until the board has rebooted and your PC has finished setting up the emulated network connection

> * Find out the dmxsun's IP address as described in the `What is it?`-section

Reviewer: You can link within the Markdown!

Author: True, but I've never used intra-document links before. I'll make it a link

Reviewer: I think you can just do a #/anchor.

Reviewer: You have!

* Open your web browser, browse to the IP address. You should see a web page with status information
* Using the navigation bar at the top, browse to `Console` and start changing values. Or fire up your favourite lighting control software (such as OLA or QLC+), configure it to send ArtNet or E1.31/sACN to the dmxsun's IP address and watch the values change in your web browser. It might seem laggy but that's only because the web interface only updates every second.

> * If you're curious and have such devices, connect a logic analyzer or RS-485-drivers to the GPIOs 6 to 21. Those are the pins where the DMX data comes out. If you attach an RS-485-driver to one of those, you can also attach and control real fixtures.

Reviewer: Are we aiming for US or British spelling? :laughing: 
```suggestion
* If you're curious and have such devices, connect a logic analyzer or RS-485 driver to GPIOs 6 to 21. Those are the pins where the DMX data comes out. If you attach an RS-485-driver to one of those, you can also attach and control real fixtures.
```

Author: Phew, no preference here. Since the E1.11 is an US-standard I'd say US? ;)

## How do I compile the firmware?

If you just want to get started quickly find the most recent action run from the branch you're interested in, extract the attached artifact zip file (from https://github.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle/actions/workflows/pico-build.yml ) and copy the rp2040-dongle.uf2 file to the Pico board when it's in bootloader mode.

> Since this is a project that adheres to the guidelines set by RaspberryPi for its pico-sdk (hopefully), you best make sure to follow the detailed documentation at https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf.

Reviewer: The existing was rather strict, follow this documentation or else!
```suggestion
Since this is a project that adheres to the guidelines set by Raspberry Pi for its pico-sdk (hopefully), you are best off following the detailed documentation at https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/pico/getting-started-with-pico.pdf.
```

> The build process will also build the React App for the integrated Web UI. For this to work, you will need to have NodeJS 14+ and NPM installed. React and all other JavaScript dependencies will be downloaded during the build, so make sure you are connected to the internet.

Reviewer: I think:
```suggestion
The build process will also build the React App for the integrated Web UI. For this to work, you will need to have NodeJS 14+ and NPM installed. React and all other JavaScript dependencies will be downloaded during the build, so make sure you are connected to the Internet.
```

> Basically with all dependencies installed, the following steps should suffice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With all dependencies installed, the following steps should suffice:
```

```
git clone https://github.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle.git
cd rp2040-dongle
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ../src

> make -j4

Reviewer: The -j4 won't help on something with fewer cores and may be worse...

Author: True. and those instructions are also pretty Linux-specific. I thought the `-j4` was quite conservative already but how about `make -j$(($(nproc)+1))`?

Reviewer: What's the time difference between zero and 4? Your suggestion feels it risks some incompatibility; I wonder if -j4 with a note might be a good compromise.

Conservative unless you're on some Pis...

Author: I never heard of "make -j0" before. It would be great if make would do some core-count-based magic here, but it doesn't. The default value without -j parameter is 1. "make -j1" runs one gcc process at a time, -j4 runs 4. On my dated 4-core laptop:
```
make -j1 (default, no parameter):
real    0m35,772s

make -j4 (nproc):
real    0m14,676s

make -j5 (nproc + 1):
real    0m14,689s

make -j64 (deliberately overloading the system):
real    0m13,488s

make -j256 (you never know):
real    0m12,913s
```

So, I don't mind leaving the `-j4` away. People experienced in running make will know a good value for the parameter on their machines and will add it by themselves. Anybody else will have to wait a tad longer ...

The only thing that can give you pain with higher values for `-j` is limited memory or swapping. That can bring down any system to its knees.

```

> This should result in an `.uf2`-file being generated that you can flash to your Pico-board as described in RaspberryPi's documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should result in an `.uf2`-file being generated that you can flash to your Pico-board as described in Raspberry Pi's documentation.
```

## How does the data flow internally?

> Dmxsun uses a pretty flexible architecture, consisting of mainly 24 DMX buffers acting as the main data storage. Data can come in via USB (either via the emulated Ethernet or some other, emulated protocol), wirelessly via the nRF24 module or from one input port and is then, depending on "patching" stored in one or multiple DMX buffers.

Reviewer: You could probably drop the quotes around patching too.
```suggestion
Dmxsun uses a pretty flexible architecture, consisting of mainly 24 DMX buffers acting as the main data storage. Data can come in via USB (either via the emulated Ethernet or some other, emulated protocol), wirelessly via the nRF24 module or from one input port and is then, depending on "patching" stored in one or more DMX buffers.
```

> From there, again depending on "patching", the data is given to one or more of the local DMX ports, to the nRF24 wireless module or to the host PC via ArtNet or E1.31/sACN.

Reviewer: I think Art-Net is hyphenated...
```suggestion
From there, again depending on "patching", the data is sent to one or more of the local DMX ports, to the nRF24 wireless module or to the host PC via Art-Net or E1.31/sACN.
```

The patching is currently fixed but will be made fully configurable in the future. The current patching works like this: Universes 1-16 from USB or emulated Ethernet go to internal DMX buffers 1-16 which go to the 16 local DMX ports. Additionally, the first 4 universes are also broadcast via the nRF24 module, should one be connected. Data coming in via the wireless module is sent to DMX buffers 5-8 and will as such appear on the local DMX ports 5-8.

## What are the upcoming features?

The best overview of planned features is to have a look at the GitHub issues: https://github.com/OpenLightingProject/rp2040-dongle/issues.

> Since the hardware is modular, we do have the option to also support DMX input (currently Work-in-progress) or universes with RDM support. There would also be the possibility to drive up to 6 WS2812b-based LED-strings instead of conventional DMX-512-A right off the board.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since the hardware is modular, we do have the option to also support DMX input (currently work-in-progress) or universes with RDM support. There would also be the possibility to drive up to 6 WS2812b-based LED-strings instead of conventional DMX-512-A right off the board.
```

> For the wireless part, mesh support is planned so you can add additional nodes forwarding the data when the wireless range should not be sufficient. It would also be great if we could talk to other, existing wireless DMX systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the wireless part, mesh support is planned so you can add additional nodes forwarding the data when the wireless range is insufficient. It would also be great if we could talk to other, existing wireless DMX systems.
```

> What might also help to make it easier to use is if dmxsun could emulate other, existing USB DMX dongles. Then, it could also be used with other software that is not able to send ArtNet or E1.31/sACN but supports other dongles. The disadvantage here is that only few dongles support more than 4 universes, while dmxsun supports 16.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What might also help to make it easier to use is if dmxsun could emulate other, existing, USB DMX dongles. Then, it could also be used with other software that is not able to send Art-Net or E1.31/sACN but supports other dongles. The disadvantage here is that only a few dongles support more than 4 universes, while dmxsun supports 16.
```

     * The MIT License (MIT)
     * Copyright (c) 2019 Ha Thach (tinyusb.org)

This project proudly uses the following libraries and thanks the respective developers for their amazing work:
* jsoncpp (https://github.com/open-source-parsers/jsoncpp, MIT license)

> * libb64 (https://github.com/open-source-parsers/jsoncpp, Public domain)

Reviewer: Link!

Author: Will do. Personally, I actually prefer to see the URLs without the need to hover over them and GitHub makes them links automatically anyways

* lwIP (https://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/lwip/, Modified BSD License)
* Pico-DMX (https://github.com/jostlowe/Pico-DMX, BSD 3-Clause "New" or "Revised" License)
* RF24, RF24Network and RF24Mesh (https://github.com/nRF24/RF24, GPL-2.0)
* snappy (https://github.com/google/snappy, The 3-Clause BSD License)

And for the integrated Web UI:
* React (https://reactjs.org/, MIT license)
* Bootstrap (https://getbootstrap.com/, MIT license)
* Chart.js (https://www.chartjs.org/, MIT license)
* couch64 (https://www.npmjs.com/package/couch64, CC-BY-SA)
* snappyjs (https://github.com/zhipeng-jia/snappyjs, MIT license)
* react-input-slider (https://github.com/swiftcarrot/react-input-slider, MIT license)

## What else do I need to know?

> If you attach an nRF24-board, you yourself are responsible to make sure you don't violate any local laws or regulations. Not all channels and transmit powers that the nRF24 module can send on might be allowed to be used in your area. The OpenLightingProject cannot be held responsible should you break a law by using this project's hard- and/or software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you attach an nRF24-board, you yourself are responsible to make sure you don't violate any local laws or regulations. Not all channels and transmit powers that the nRF24 module can use may be allowed to be used in your area. The Open Lighting Project cannot be held responsible should you break the law by using this project's hardware and/or software.
```
